* Title: Structured error handling in Rust
* Champion: @CodeSandwich
* Conversation (optional): [thread on radicle.community](https://radicle.community/t/proposal-structured-error-handling-in-rust/179)
* References:
  * [The previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md)
  * [`std::error::Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html)
  * [A discussion about the good design of errors](https://users.rust-lang.org/t/do-people-not-care-about-printable-error-chains-a-k-a-how-to-nicely-implement-display-for-an-error/35362)

# Introduction
We need good error handling to make our lives easier.
We've already agreed to use `thiserror` and `anyhow` in the
[previous error handling proposal](https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-decisions/blob/master/proposals/0001.md).
They are fantastic tools, but we're still lacking a common design language.
There are many ways to create an error and some of them don't play well with others.
Without common conventions handling errors is problematic too.

This is a guide to structuring errors well.

# Explanation

## The great `Error` unification

The ultimate goal is to make your errors as easy to integrate and handle as possible.
The canonical way of achieving this is by implementing the `std::error::Error` trait.
It's universally used in the Rust ecosystem and provides a common interface for working with
different errors coming from numerous crates.
It's not possible to enforce the exact behavior of an implementation of the `Error` trait, but
there's a widely used convention making it reasonably uniform and predictable.

## The correct behavior of an `Error` implementation

`Error` provides 2 core functionalities:

- it provides the `source` method, which may or may not return a reference to another
`std::error::Error`
- it derives from `Display` making all its implementors printable

### The behavior of `source`

`source` should return a value when the error has another error nested inside.
The wrapped error should be the cause of the outer one, usually a bit lower level and more detailed.
The errors can be wrapped multiple times to express the whole chain of errors down to the root
cause. It can be traversed by calling `source` recursively.

For example the custom `FileLoadError` can wrap the `std::io::Error`.
This way the file loading function doesn't have to know about all the possible file system failures
described by the `std::io::Error`.
When it gets one, it simply wraps it in the `FileLoadError` and returns it.
If a higher-level function is interested in what caused the `FileLoadError`, it can call its
`source` method and get its cause.

`source` should return `None` when the error is the root cause and doesn't wrap another error.
It's also impossible to return a wrapped error when it doesn't implement `Error`.

### The behavior of `Display`

The `Display` implementation should briefly describe the error.
It should never include information provided by the error returned from the `source`.
Its output should be formatted as a single line.
If it's a single sentence, it should start with a lowercase letter and end with no interpunction.
These rules make it easy to print the whole chain of errors as described in the next section.

Examples:

✔️ `failed to load the file '/tmp/file'`

❌ `failed to load the file '/tmp/file': file not found`
reason: includes information provided by its `source`

❌ `Failed to load the file '/tmp/file'!`
reason: a single sentence starting with a capital letter and ending with interpunction

## Printing a chain of `Error`s

When all the errors in a chain behave correctly, insightful and well formatted messages can be
easily provided to the user.
The error can be iterated by recursively calling `source` to print each layer and provide the full
chain of errors that caused the failure.
Due to strict `Display` implementation rules outlined in the previous section, there's a lot of
creative freedom when it comes to chain formatting.
The `source` traversal can be done manually with the `anyhow::Chain` iterator or with the
very similar iterator `std::error::Chain` as soon as it's stabilized.

An example of printing the chain manually:

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
let mut parent = &error;
while let Some(cause) = parent.source() {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
    parent = cause;
}
```

An example of printing the chain with `anyhow::Chain`, useful for logging:

```rust
println!("An error occured: {}", error);
for cause in anyhow::Chain::new(&error) {
    println!("  caused by: {}", cause);
}
```

Both examples have the same output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file
  caused by: failed to load the file '~/.app_config'
  caused by: file not found
```

An example of printing the chain in a single line with `anyhow::Chain`:

```rust
print!("An error occured: {}", error);
anyhow::Chain::new(&error).for_each(|e| print!(" ⮩ {}", e);
println!();
```

An example output:

```
An error occured: failed to load the configuration file ⮩ failed to load the file '~/.app_config' ⮩ file not found
```

# Recommendation

These examples of building errors serve as a practical guide.
There are some common patterns of error structures and all of them can be implemented conveniently
and correctly using `thiserror` and `anyhow`.

All the examples use `enum`s, but it's fine to use `struct`s instead when there's only one variant.

## Root cause errors

These are errors that don't wrap other errors inside.
They may contain multiple structures and a lot of details, but their `source` always returns `None`.
A single error enum can be both a root cause or a wrapper depending on which variant is used.

### Statically typed root cause error

The error has a statically defined meaning and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("the file contains invalid value {0}")
    InvalidValue(u32),
    ...
}
```

### Textual root cause error

The error is defined only as text.
It may be harder to track by humans and it's almost impossible to analyze in the code.
It's very easy to create new error variants, but they aren't easily reusable.

Textual errors are often implemented as `String`s, but it's a subpar solution.
It's much better to use `anyhow::Error`, because unlike `String` it implements
`std::error::Error` making its processing easier and more consistent.
The `anyhow` crate also provides the `anyhow!` macro, which works just like `format!`.

```rust
fn check_value(value: u32) -> Result<(), anyhow::Error> {
    ...
    .ok_or_else(|| anyhow::anyhow!("the file contains an unexpected value {}", value))?;
    ...
}
```

## Wrapper errors

These are errors that wrap other errors inside. Their `source` always returns the inner error.
A wrapper error can be just a variant of a bigger error with other variants, some of which may be
even roots.

### Statically typed wrapper error

The error has a statically defined cause and details.
It's easy to track it by humans and analyze it in the code.
It requires scrutiny and planning to design, but it's easy to reuse in different parts of the code.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("failed to open the file '{path}'")]
    FileSystemError {
        path: String,
        #[source]
        source: std::io::Error,
    },
    ...
}
```

Sometimes you may want a variant to act like the error it contains.
It's supported by `thiserror` in a form of the `transparent` annotation.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the wrapper.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error(transparent)]
    Other(#[from] anyhow::Error)
    ...
}
```

### Statically typed wrapper error when source has multiple types

A single error may have multiple possible causes, sometimes with different types.
When that's the case, the regular wrapping described in the previous section won't work, because
each `enum` case can only contain data of a single type.
A logical, but ugly workaround would be to create a wrapper error case for each possible cause:

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseErrorUtf8(#[from] std::str::Utf8Error),
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseErrorInt(#[from] std::num::ParseIntError),
    ...
}
```

The proper solution is an addition of another layer of the error, but with all its variants
annotated as `transparent`.
All the `std::error::Error` and `Display` calls are then passed directly to the internal error
effectively hiding the additional layer.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseError(#[from] FileParseError),
    ...
}

#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
enum FileParseError {
    #[error(transparent)]
    Utf8Error(#[from] std::str::Utf8Error),
    #[error(transparent)]
    ParseIntError(#[from] std::num::ParseIntError),
}
```

This solution has a downside: it affects the behavior of the `From` trait.
It forces the emitter of the error to first convert it into the intermediate layer and only then to
create the wrapper error. In this example it would look like this:

```rust
fn parse_file(&str) -> Result<LoadedFile, FileLoadError> {
    ...
    .map_err(|error: Utf8Error| FileParseError::from(error))?;
    ...
}
```

It can be solved by adding implementations of `From`, either manually:

```rust
impl From<Utf8Error> for FileLoadError {
    fn from(error: Utf8Error) -> Self {
        FileParseError::from(error).into()
    }
}

impl From<ParseIntError> for FileLoadError {
    fn from(error: ParseIntError) -> Self {
        FileParseError::from(error).into()
    }
}
```

Or with a blanket implementation:

```rust
impl <T: Into<FileParseError>> From<T> for FileLoadError {
    fn from(error: T) -> Self {
        error.into().into()
    }
}
```

### Dynamically typed wrapper error

The catch-all error wrapper of `anyhow::Error`, which can contain any cause.
It's flexible, but it obscures the structure of the errors.
It's easy to misuse and wrap a wrong error due to lack of the static type checking.
It should be generally avoided except for rare cases when static structure would be overly
complicated and the error is created, handled and discarded in a narrow scope.

```rust
#[derive(Debug, thiserror::Error)]
pub enum FileLoadError {
    ...
    #[error("error while parsing the file")]
    ParseError(#[from] anyhow::Error),
    ...
}
```

# Drawbacks

There are 2 main reasons **not** to follow this convention:

1. Errors are handled too rarely to be worth any attention
2. Some crates in the ecosystem don't follow this convention, so at some depth the errors may still
return to being poorly structured and formatted. Notable examples:
- [hyper](https://docs.rs/hyper/0.13.5/src/hyper/error.rs.html#346-354)
- [libp2p](https://docs.rs/parity-multiaddr/0.8.0/src/parity_multiaddr/errors.rs.html#22-35)

# Open Questions

None.

# Future possibilities

It will be easier to put a full error into a line of a log thanks to a tighter formatting control.

The CLIs will be able to easily print clear and insightful error messages.
