* Title: *Licensing and DCO*
* Champion: *@FintanH/fintan.halpenny@gmail.com@*
* Conversation:
    * https://radicle.community/t/radicle-licensing-model/282
    * https://radicle.community/t/were-implementing-a-developer-certificate-of-origin-dco/303
* References:
    * [Linux Kernel DCO][dco]
    * [GPLv3 License][gplv3]

# Summary

The decision here is to implement most of the Radicle software under the license
of GPLv3 + Radicle Linking Exception. We are also asking outside contributors to
sign-off on their commits to our software, as described by our Developer
Certificate of Origin (DCO).

# Explanation

Most of the explanation of why we are doing this is recorded in the
`radicle.community` links above. What this means is that all repositories under
`radicle-dev` must comply with the following sections.

# Recommendation

In this section we include the templates that need to be included and also other
recommendations to make the licensing experience as smooth as possible for both
contributors and core developers.

## License File

Every repository MUST include a `LICENSE` file which corresponds to this
[file][license-file].

**Note** that there are placeholders `<project>` which correspond to the
name of the repository. You MUST replace these with the actual name.

### Shared Libraries

It is RECOMMENDED that shared libraries be licensed permissively with
`Apache-2.0 OR MIT`, which can be found [here][apache] and [here][mit].

A shared library is defined as one that does not implement aspects of the
protocol.

## DCO File

Every repository MUST include a `DCO` which corresponds to this
[file][dco-file].

## Copyright and License Header

Every file that contains source code MUST include a header which corresponds to
this [file][license-header] at the **top** of each source file as a comment.

**Note** that there are placeholders `<project>` which correspond to the
name of the repository. You MUST replace these with the actual name.

**Note** that there is a choice between `The Radicle Foundation` OR `Monadic GmbH`.
`Monadic GmbH` is reserved for `radicle-upstream` while `The Radicle Foundation`
is used for any protocol related repositories.

Also included is a [script][license-header-check] for checking the
license-header for Rust files.

## CONTRIBUTING File

Every repository MUST include a `CONTRIBUTING.md` file. The
inclusion of the `CONTRIBUTING.md` file will mean that GitHub will prompt new
contributors to look at the file before making a pull request.

The file must include the following section:

```
## Certificate of Origin

By contributing to this project, you agree to the [Developer Certificate of
Origin (DCO)](./path/to/DCO). This document was created by the Linux Kernel community and is a
simple statement that you, as a contributor, have the legal right to make the
contribution.

In order to show your agreement with the DCO you should include at the end of the commit message,
the following line: Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>, using your real name and email.

This can be done easily using the -s flag on the git commit.

If you've found you've pushed a few commits without signed-off-by, you can still add it afterwards.

### Fixing the DCO

If you did not sign-off one or more of your commits then it is not all for not. The
crowd at `src-d` have a wonderful guide on how to remedy this situation
[here](https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/building-a-strong-community/creating-a-pull-request-template-for-your-repository)

## Copyright and License Header

For consistency and clarity, we must include a header at the top of each
source file. The template for this header can be found
[here](./path/to/license-header). If you are creating a new file in the
repository you will have to add this header to the file.
```

## DCO Bot

To ensure that all commits by an outside contributor are signed-off we SHALL add a
[DOC bot][dco-bot] to monitor pull requests on our repositories.

## Merging Pull Requests

We SHALL NOT merge pull requests using the GitHub UI. This is to avoid having
GitHub as a contributor and to ensure that our developers are adding a sign-off
to the squash commit.

Our maintainers should follow the following checklist when merging a pull
request:
- [ ] Has the PR received the appropriate number of approvals?
- [ ] Has the CI finished and passed all the tests?
- [ ] Does the DCO bot say all commits have been signed-off?

This will be indicated by the green checks in the GitHub UI. Once you are
satisfied then you can use:

```
$ git merge -s --squash
```

Since this commit could contain several authors it is RECOMMENDED that you do a
double-check for all sign-offs.

At this point you SHALL add a final sign-off:

```
Signed-off-by: John Doe <john.doe@example.com>
```

## Monadic Sign-offs

While it is not strictly necessary, we are RECOMMENDING that maintainers
from Monadic sign-off on their commits as well. The easiest way to set this is
up by including it a `git commit` alias, for example:

```
# gcs for git-commit-sign-off
alias gcs="git commit -s"
```

## Pull Request Template

It is RECOMMENDED that the repository contains [pull request
template][pr-template] which has the following checklist:

```
- [ ] Have you [signed-off](./path/to/CONTRIBUTING.md) on all your commits?
- [ ] Did you include the [license header](./path/to/CONTRIBUTING.md) in any new
  files you created?
```

# Open Questions

* How do we enforce CI has passed before merging into the main-line branch?
* Do we use our @monadic.xyz emails or do we use our GitHub emails?

[apache]: ../assets/LICENSE-APACHE
[dco]: https://elinux.org/Developer_Certificate_Of_Origin
[dco-bot]: https://github.com/probot/dco
[dco-file]: ../assets/DCO
[gplv3]: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html
[license-file]: ../assets/LICENSE
[license-header]: ../assets/license-header
[license-header-check]: ../assets/license-header-check
[mit]: ../assets/LICENSE-MIT
[pr-template]: https://docs.github.com/en/free-pro-team@latest/github/building-a-strong-community/creating-a-pull-request-template-for-your-repository
