* Title: *Radicle client URL scheme*
* Champion: *@rudolfs, rudolfs@osins.org*
* Conversation:
  * [Radicle Community discussion][community]
  * [Deep linking discussion][deeplink]
  * [Shareable identifier discussion][shareable]


The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119][rfc2119]
[RFC8174][rfc8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
here.


# Summary

We have received multiple feature requests from our community regarding
deep-linking in our client application. A common way to enable such
functionality is to devise a URL scheme along with a custom protocol and
implement a handler which listens for requests of the given protocol in the
client application.

Given that there might be multiple competing Radicle client implementations and
to make sure that shared URLs are compatible with as many Radicle client
implementations as possible we decided to have a specification for our URL
scheme.


# Recommendation

In order to not reinvent the wheel our URL scheme is a subset of the
[URL spec][urlspec], with some restrictions to make use in certain
environments more safe.

The URL scheme to be used by Radicle client applications MUST adhere to the
following scheme:

    radicle://<namespace>/<namespaceSpecificPart>

Where:

- `radicle://`
  The Radicle client protocol name.

- `<namespace>`
  A namespace that distinguishes which component of the client
  application the resource addresses.

- `<namespaceSpecificPart>`
  Further resource hierarchy and metadata as defined by `<namespace>`.

For security reasons only non-destructive operations SHALL be triggered by
deep-links in a client application. Any action that would lead to data being
changed MUST be first confirmed by the user.

For example, while it is okay to display a project by following a deep-link,
it should not be possible to delete a project. However, it is fine to show a
"Delete Project" dialog where the user first has to explicitly confirm the
destructive action by clicking a button.

Furthermore, applications MUST NOT accept URLs longer than 1024 bytes, and
SHOULD discard subsequent events for 1 second after one was received. This is
to prevent DDOS attacks and buffer overflow bugs.

Lastly, all characters of the [application/x-www-form-encoded set][percent] are
to be percent-encoded in path components. We RECOMMEND to avoid them for
legibility.


## Namespaces

Namespaces provide a way to partition the URL scheme into multiple
independently versioned compartments, this allows us to change the scheme
specification in one namespace while leaving another unchanged.

Currently clients MUST support only the `link` namespace. The `ethereum`
namespace is reserved, but not yet specified. Adding new namespaces and all
breaking changes to existing namespaces SHALL be documented in this spec and go
through a peer review before becoming accepted.

The first section of the `<namespaceSpecificPart>` MUST be a version number.
Versioning namespaces allows us to define rules for how client applications
should handle backwards and forwards compatibility.


### The `link` namespace

The current version of this namespace is `v0`, any breaking modifications to it
REQUIRE a version increase. The version number is a positive integer and should
be increased sequentially by 1 and documented in a new section below.

Clients adhering to this spec are REQUIRED to support the latest version only,
however, they MAY support any number of previous versions to retain backwards
compatibility with already published links.

When a client receives a request for a link that is of a  higher version than
the client supports an informational message about the fact SHOULD be displayed
to the user, no further action is necessary.


#### Version `v0`

The `<namespaceSpecificPart>` of the `link` namespace MUST adhere to the
following form:

    radicle://link/v0/<resource>[/<subResources>][#<metadata>]

Where:

- `<resource>`
  A resource within the `link` namespace.

- `<subResources>`
  Zero or more hierarchical sub-resources of `<resource>`.

- `<metadata>`
  Metadata related to the resource specified by `<namespaceSpecificPart>`.

All clients MUST support the `Radicle ID` (aka Radicle URN) `<resource>` type.
Adding new resource types REQUIRES an amendment of this spec.

The default action when requesting a resource is to be interpreted as "show"
analoguous to a "GET" request in REST.


## Examples

- Show a resource identified by `Radicle ID`.

```
radicle://link/v0/rad:git:hnrkdjjrkfmi43ukh594bxtf1k664oo3hzaeo
```

- Show a resource identified by `Radicle ID` and pass along metadata. The JSON
  object to be encoded is: `{name:"fncy",description:"Fancy project"}`.

```
radicle://link/v0/rad:git:hnrkdjjrkfmi43ukh594bxtf1k664oo3hzaeo#e25hbWU6ImZuY3kiLGRlc2NyaXB0aW9uOiJGYW5jeSBwcm9qZWN0In0
```


[community]: https://radicle.community/t/opening-upstream-via-links-on-the-web/1856
[deeplink]: https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-upstream/issues/1512
[percent]: https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#application-x-www-form-urlencoded-percent-encode-set
[rfc2119]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119
[rfc8174]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8174
[shareable]: https://github.com/radicle-dev/radicle-upstream/issues/840
[urlspec]: https://url.spec.whatwg.org
