
# ADR 0001

## Error Handling

As good Rust developers we persevere to provide good error handling. This is a nuanced statement as it may cover library errors, command line errors,
structured recoverable errors, unstructured recoverable errors, and unrecoverable errors. This proposal will examine and contrast the different
methods and libraries that exist, ultimately making a decision as to which methods and library(ies) our Rust developers should use when writing our
libraries and applications.

## The std

// Talk about Option and Result // Talk about Error trait

## Types of Errors

// Talk about String // Talk about enums

## High Level View

In this section we view three libraries that are currently the most mature in terms of features. The three libraries are:
* [failure](https://docs.rs/failure/0.1.6/failure/)
* [snafu](https://docs.rs/snafu/0.6.2/snafu/)
* [anyhow](https://docs.rs/anyhow/1.0.26/anyhow/)

**Note**: These links are to versions that are latest as of 31/1/2019.

The table is a distillation of [Yoshua Wuyats error handling survey](https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/error-handling-survey/).

**Legend**:
* ✔️: Is supported by the library
* ❌: Is not supported by the library

| Library          | assertion string | assertion structured | causes | backtraces | errors from strings | early returns | context | custom errors |
| :--------------: | :--------------: | :------------------: | :----: | :--------: | :-----------------: | :-----------: | :-----: | :-----------: |
| `failure`        |        ✔️         |           ❌         |    ✔️   |     ✔️      |          ✔️          |        ✔️      |    ✔️    |       ✔️       |
| `snafu`          |        ❌        |           ✔️          |    ❌  |     ✔️      |          ❌         |        ❌     |    ✔️    |       ✔️       |
| `anyhow`         |        ✔️         |           ✔️          |    ✔️   |     ✔️*     |          ✔️          |        ✔️      |    ✔️    |       ✔️\*\*   |

\* Enabled via [backtrace](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/backtrace/index.html) being available on nightly
\*\* Ebabled via [thiserror](https://docs.rs/thiserror/1.0.10/thiserror/)

### Features

**assertion**: allows the author to make an assertion and return an error if it fails. The **string** variant means that the author can only use
string values as the error, whereas the **structured** means that the author can only use a structured error. In the case of `anyhow` the author is
allowed to use either.

**causes**: allows the author to iterate over the sources of errors.

**backtraces**: allows the author to get a back-trace of the failure calls, provided they turn on `RUST_BACKTRACE`.

**errors from strings**: allows the author to throw an anonymous error from a string value.

**early returns**: allows the author to return from a function early via a macro call.

**context**: allows the author to add contextual information to a function that can error.

**custom errors**: allows the author to derive the library's custom error type along with special `Display` attributions.

### Discussion

## Proposal

## Acceptance

_Pending_

## Conclusion
